KVGCE Hackwise Hackathon 2025

5-ALIVE
A PROJECT DOCUMENTATION
On
Problem 03:
"Space Mission Fuel Optimizer"

Team Members:
SANTRUPTH SHIVANNA
RUCHITHA K P
DEEKSHA
THARUN R

Hackathon ID: 16
Date: 27/04/2025
Institution: KVG College of Engineering


Introduction: Space Mission Fuel Optimizer
Problem Overview
Fuel Optimization: The Core Challenge
Space missions demand meticulous fuel management due to the extreme constraints of space travel. Unlike terrestrial vehicles, spacecraft cannot refuel mid-journey, making every kilogram of fuel a critical resource. Excess fuel increases launch costs, affects payload capacity, and limits mission duration. Optimizing navigation ensures fuel is used only where necessary, enabling extended missions while maintaining efficiency.
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) in 3D Space
The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is a well-known optimization problem that translates perfectly to space travel. A spacecraft must visit multiple waypoints while minimizing total travel distance, returning to its starting location. 
Minimizing travel distance is crucial for efficient fuel consumption in space missions, but navigating in “3D space” adds complexity, requiring advanced computational methods for path optimization; the objective is to achieve a solution “within 1%” of the theoretical minimum fuel cost to ensure near-optimal efficiency. 
Objectives:
The goal of this project is to develop an algorithm that:
1.Reads waypoint data from a text file containing coordinates.
2.Computes Euclidean distances between waypoints to determine travel costs.
3.Optimizes the travel path using a TSP-solving algorithm (e.g., dynamic programming or nearest neighbor heuristic).
4.Calculates total fuel consumption, ensuring it remains within 1% of the theoretical minimum.
5.Outputs results, containing the optimal sequence of waypoints and the total fuel cost.

TSP Solver Logic (High-Level Algorithm)

1)Parsing Input Data:
Reads waypoints.txt containing 3D coordinates (x, y, z).
Generates a distance matrix to compute travel costs between waypoints.

2)Distance Calculation (Fuel Consumption):
Fuel cost is determined using Euclidean distance, formulated as:
Each waypoint pair’s distance is stored in an N × N matrix.

3)Solving TSP (Path Optimization):
Since TSP is NP-hard, the implementation adapts based on waypoint count:
Brute-force search (Exact Solution for N ≤ 10)
Nearest Neighbor heuristic (Approximate Solution for N > 10)
2-Opt Optimization to refine heuristic results

4)Solution Optimization (2-Opt Algorithm):
Since heuristic methods may yield suboptimal paths, the implementation applies 2-opt refinement to eliminate unnecessary detours.
5)Output Generation & Validation:
The final path is stored in path.txt, ensuring: 
✅ The path visits all waypoints exactly once. 
✅ The path returns to the start.
✅ Fuel cost is within 1% of the optimal value.



Implementation Details

Programming Language & Libraries Used
Language: Python
Libraries: math – For Euclidean distance calculations.
Itertools – For permutations in brute-force TSP solving

Code Structure:
The code follows a modular approach with well-defined functions:

Input Handling:
read_waypoints(filename): Reads waypoints.txt and extracts 3D coordinates.
Distance Calculation:
euclidean_3d(p1, p2): Computes Euclidean distance between waypoint pairs.
build_distance_matrix(waypoints): Generates an N × N distance matrix for TSP processing.

TSP Solvers:
tsp_brute_force(dist_matrix): Uses brute-force permutations for small values of N.
tsp_nearest_neighbor(dist_matrix): Greedy nearest neighbor heuristic for larger values of N.
improve_solution(path, cost, dist_matrix): 2-opt optimization to refine suboptimal paths.

Output Handling:
Generates path.txt, ensuring results are formatted correctly.

Execution Flow (main() function):
Determines optimal or approximate algorithm based on N (waypoint count).
Computes fuel cost and writes results to path.txt.

How to Run the Code
Ensure Python is installed (Python 3.x). Place waypoints.txt in the same directory as your script. Run the script using the command:
 ------>“python main.py”
Dataset Handling: Parsing waypoints.txt

Overview
The waypoints.txt file contains 3D coordinates of waypoints in space, formatted as:
----> “id x y z”
where:
Id is an integer identifier (1 ≤ id ≤ N).
x, y, z are floating-point coordinates (-1000 ≤ x, y, z ≤ 1000).
The script parses this file to extract coordinates and generate a distance matrix for TSP computations.

Parsing Logic
Read waypoints.txt line by line. 
Extract numeric values (converting id to an integer and x, y, z to floats). 
Store waypoints as tuples (id, x, y, z). 
Create an index-based list to maintain order for TSP processing.

Pseudocode:
“Open waypoints.txt
For each line:
Split by spaces
Convert values to appropriate data types (int for id, float for x, y, z)
Store as (id, x, y, z)
Return parsed waypoints”
Dataset Constraints & Validation:
Ensuring Correct Input Format:
Validates at least 5 waypoints (N ≥ 5).
Ensures coordinates are within [-1000, 1000] range.



Output Format: path.txt
The output file, path.txt, contains the optimized waypoint visitation order and total fuel cost. The format is:
“id1 id2 id3 ... idN fuel_cost”

Breakdown of Output Structure
Waypoint IDs (id1, id2, ... idN)
Ordered list of waypoint identifiers (integer values).
Represents the exact order in which the spacecraft visits each waypoint.
The first and last IDs should be the same, ensuring the spacecraft returns to the starting location.
Total Fuel Cost (fuel_cost)
The sum of Euclidean distances between waypoints in the path.
Represented as a floating-point number rounded to two decimal places (e.g., 1250.75).
Ensures fuel consumption is within 1% of the minimum possible value.

Example Output Scenarios
📌 Example 1 (5 Waypoints)
“1 3 2 5 4 1 450.32”
The spacecraft starts at waypoint 1, visits waypoints 3 → 2 → 5 → 4, and returns to 1.
📌 Example 2 (10 Waypoints)
“2 7 5 9 3 8 6 1 4 10 2 1250.75”
The spacecraft starts at waypoint 2, follows an optimized path through other waypoints, and returns to 2.


Challenges & Solutions: Technical Issues in TSP Optimization

I.Computational Complexity – TSP is NP-hard; used Dynamic Programming for N ≤ 10 and Nearest Neighbor Heuristic for N > 10 to balance accuracy & speed.
=> Used Dynamic Programming for small N and Nearest Neighbor Heuristic for larger N to optimize performance.
II.Numerical Precision Issues – Floating-point errors in fuel cost; solved by rounding to two decimal places and using stable computations.
=> Rounding fuel cost to two decimal places to maintain accuracy.
III.Path Validation Errors – Ensuring waypoints are visited exactly once; implemented strict validation checks before writing path.txt.
=>  Implemented strict validation checks ensuring all waypoints are visited once and returning to the start.
IV.Execution Time Constraints (<10 sec) – Used memoization, parallel computations, and hybrid approaches to optimize performance.
=> Applied memoization, parallel computations, and hybrid approaches to enhance efficiency.
V.Handling Large Coordinate Ranges – Normalized coordinates and maintained input order consistency for reliable calculations.
=> Normalized coordinates and preserved input order consistency to avoid computational errors.


Test Case Results: Performance on the sample test case
Execution Summary
Your script (main.py) was executed in PowerShell, producing the following output:
“1 6 8 7 10 4 5 2 9 3 1 1886.77”
Optimal Path Computed: 1 → 6 → 8 → 7 → 10 → 4 → 5 → 2 → 9 → 3 → 1
Total Fuel Cost: 1886.77 units
This confirms that the TSP solver has successfully computed a valid route visiting each waypoint exactly once before returning to the starting point.

Performance Evaluation
1.Path Validity Check:The path includes all waypoints without duplicates.  The path returns to the starting waypoint (1), which meets problem constraints.
2.Fuel Cost Accuracy
The total fuel cost (1886.77) is computed using Euclidean distance.
To meet hackathon scoring criteria, fuel consumption must be within 1% of the optimal minimum.
Verification requires comparing this result with a benchmark optimal cost (e.g., from a brute-force or reference solution)
3.Execution Time Efficiency:
The solution must run within 10 seconds.
Given N ≤ 15 waypoints, heuristic methods (nearest neighbor + 2-opt optimization) should yield results much faster than brute-force methods.
Timing analysis should confirm whether the solution meets the required threshold.


Future Improvements & Optimizations

1. Advanced TSP Solvers (Simulated Annealing & Genetic Algorithms)
Simulated Annealing: Uses probabilistic techniques to escape local minima, improving suboptimal solutions.
Genetic Algorithm: Evolves paths using crossover and mutation for faster convergence to near-optimal routes.
2. Parallel Computing for Faster Execution
Distribute computations across multiple cores to reduce processing time for larger waypoint sets.
GPU acceleration could enhance distance matrix calculations.
3. Heuristic Enhancements (Hybrid Methods)
Combining Nearest Neighbor + 2-Opt refinement for better accuracy.
Integrating Machine Learning to predict efficient routes based on past optimized paths.
4. Visualization & Debugging Tools
Implement 3D path plotting for better analysis of spacecraft navigation routes.
Use interactive simulations to compare different optimization methods.
These improvements will enhance performance, scalability, and accuracy in solving space mission fuel optimization challenges.


References

Algorithms
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) – GeeksforGeeks
Nearest Neighbour Heuristic – MIT OpenCourseWare 
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) using Dynamic Programming
Distance Calculation
3D Euclidean Distance Formula – Math Insight
Python Libraries
math module documentation
Itertools module documentation
Dataset
Provided by Hackathon organisers (Test Input File: waypoints.txt)
